
- After Cromwell's conquest of Ireland, parliament started the process fo confiscating 2.5 million acres of land from Irish Catholic landlords to give to English soldiers. The act of Parliament that enabled this technically called for the 80,000 Irish people to be executed to make way for the English, but luckily less than 1000 people were executed as part of the disapropriation. The dispossesd Irish from every corner of the island were banished to small plots of land in the relatively barren county of Connaught. The best historial accounting implies that catholics went from owning 59% of Irish land in 1641 to just 22% by 1688, figures from Woolrych's _Britain in Revolution: 1625-1660_

- Discussion of the print trade
> The print trade was already thriving, as reflected in what survives today. Around 150 titles per year survive for the 1550s, but this rises to around 500 in the 1620s, and this must only be a fraction of what was actually produced. Literacy was rising, too: in 1500, only 10 per cent of adult men and 1 per cent of women could sign their names. By the second quarter of the seventeenth century this had risen to somewhere near 30 per cent and 10 per cent, respectively.

> Perhaps most revolutionary of all was the new type of publication that appeared on the bookstalls of London in 1620. Published in Amsterdam by a Dutchman, it was a folio broadsheet, untitled, bearing news – in English – from the Continent.

> By 1642, not only was the avalanche of pamphlets showing no signs of easing – some 4,038 titles survive from 1642, more than any single year for more than a hundred years – but there were deeper signs of something going seriously amiss.

> What added particular energy to all this in the 1620s was the rapid spread of political news. With the outbreak of the war, suddenly it was everywhere, and not just in print. One could not pass through the streets of the capital, wrote one observer, without being ‘continually stayed by one or other, to know what news’ from Bohemia.

- Spring and Summer of 1647
> The men were chiefly concerned about three things: the threat of being disbanded without their full arrears of pay, which ran to forty-three weeks in the cavalry; their liability, when disbanded, to be prosecuted for acts committed in war; and the conditions of service that they faced if they were sent to Ireland. Including as they did many of the longest-serving soldiers in the parliament's service, and most of them having enlisted as volunteers, they did not see why they should be compelled to go to Ireland when shorter-serving conscripts were being paid off, and if they did go they wanted to fight alongside their old comrades, under the regimental officers and the general whom they knew.

> The army was indeed on the very brink of a revolt that was to give the whole course of political events a new direction, yet it might yet have been persuaded to draw back from it. If the Declaration of Dislike had been revoked, if parliament had paid public tribute to the honour of the army that had won the war for it, if it had postponed disbandment until more of the soldiers's material grievances had been met and promised them much more of their overdue pay when in due course they were disbanded, and if it had agreed to reconsider the provision for an expeditionary force for Ireland, the situation could almost certainly have been saved.

> Next evening two or three thousand reformadoes demonstrated in St James's Field, clamouring for the City to join them in pressuring parliament to bring the king back to his capital. The Common Council was divided, but the Commons' vote to reinstate the old City Militia Committee temporarily reunited it. It welcomed two mass petitions urging it not to yield control over its trained bands, and on the 26th it processed in a body to Westminister to present them to parliament. An angry crowd of citizens followed the City fathers, with apprentices noisily prominent, and it was bent on no mere peaceful demonstration.

> It was actively encouraged, if not incited, by some prominent members of the City government, by a number of Presbyterian clergymen and militia officers, and almost certainly by some of the eleven impeached MPs. This mob first invaded the House of Lords, and bullied the peers into voting to restore the City's presbyterian militia Committee and rescinding parliament's condemnation of its Solemn Engagement. Then it forced its way into the Commons' chamber, abusing and insulting the members-some had excrement thrown in their faces-until they not only confirmed the Lords' votes but passed a resolution inviting the king to London forthwith.

> Once free of the mob the Speakers of both Houses, with eight peers and fifty-seven MPs, left Westminster and took refuge with the army... For a week the members remaining at Westminster made a show of carrying on business under illegitimate replacement speakers, and forbade the army to come within thirty miles.

> The New Model's entry into London was a well staged demonstration of its strength and discipline. Fairfax did not hasten it, for he wanted no bloodshed. He drew up his 15,000 men on Hounslow Health on 3 August-their ranks stretched for a mile and a half-and escorted the two Speakers, fourteen peers, and about a hundred MPs in a review of them. Not a shot was fired nor a sword drawn when his regiments encircled the City next day, and when he escorted the returning members to the Palace of Westminster on the 5th his men wore laurel leaves in their hats and the church bells pealed. To complete the triumph, all his twenty regiments paraded in Hyde Park on the 7th, a Saturday, before marching to Cheapside with colours flying, trumpets playing, and drums beating. From that artery of the old City they spread out and moved through all its streets, to be greeted not sullenly but with enthusiastic plaudits. Their orderliness impressed everybody; they took not so much as an apple, it was said, and the contrast with the recent behaviour of the reformadoes was taken to heart. What would it have been like, one wonders, if they had been able to bring back the king!

- When you hear about several thoundand men marching on London it is important to keep preportions in perspective: there were only ~5.3 million people in England at that time, so this would be something more like _150,000_ men marching on London today

- Cromwell, along with several of parliament's officers, were simultaneously serving as MPs and as military officeers. Add this to the 'why we bother with seperations of powers'

- Irish conflict was one of the most civil warish of civil wars: Lord Inchiquin: King -> parliament 1644 -> confederates in 1647 -> king 1648

- Purchasing army officer commisions in the 18th century brittish military makes a lot more sense in light of 17th century britain: it keeps aristocratic control of the armed forces rather than let in talented outsiders who are not as bought into the established order
