"What made all the resentment towards icons and symbols far more intense were the Laudian reforms that had overturned the Church of England in the 1630s. One of Parliament’s main missions was to remedy all this. In Suffolk, William Dowsing led a campaign which destroyed decorations in 150 churches. Dowsing was careful, meticulous, a keeper of long lists and records."
^ Purkiss

"Is brotherly love, and a healing spirit of that force and value amongst us that it ought? ... Do we first search for the kingdom of Christ within us, before we seek one without us? ... Do we not more contend for saints having rule in the world, than over their own hearts? ... Do not some of us affirm ourselves to be the only true ministry, and true churches of Christ, and only to have the ordinances in purity, excluding our brethren, though of equal gifts? ... Do we remember old puritan, or rather primitive simplicity, self-denial, mercy to the poor, uprightness and justice?"

"formal toleration of catholics. He replied that a public declaration granting them full religious freedom was politically impossible, but claimed that they had less cause for complaint under his government than under that of the Long Parliament. He himself, he said, had shown compassion to very many; he had plucked many out of the fire-the raging fire of persecution, which did tyrannize over their consciences, and encroached by an arbitrariness of power over their estates'. He hoped to do more for them as soon as he could remove certain impediments, but in the event his second parliament was to press him in the opposite direction. Nevertheless Bordeaux assured Mazarin that catholic priests were moving freely about London"

"All who professed faith in God by Jesus Christ were to be free to practise their religion, so long as they did not abuse it to the civil injury of others, or disturb the peace, or invoke it to justify licentiousness. This liberty was not to extend to 'popery or prelacy', but there was a widespread de facto toleration of Anglican worship throughout the 1650s, and even towards catholics Cromwell's government was more indulgent than the letter of the law and the constitution prescribed. He was consistently more tolerant than his parliaments."




# Scratch

## The Blazing World Quotes

By now the war was three years old. It had brought violence, destruction and punishing taxation. By its end, around 62,000 soldiers were dead, and perhaps 100,000 more had died from war-related disease. Some 150 towns had been severely damaged, some set on fire by white-hot cannonballs deliberately designed to enflame timber buildings, and around 10,000 homes had been destroyed. page 202

But all armies, Fairfax’s included, brought a heavy tax burden. Indeed, that burden was now much higher than it had been under Charles’s Personal Rule in the 1630s, with the excise on basic commodities hitting the poor much harder than the rich. In some counties, the level of tax in the 1640s was ten times that of Ship Money in the 1630s. Meanwhile, many soldiers were quartered on civilian houses, and people complained that they would ‘eat the meat out of their children’s mouths’, and then moan about its quality.

Star Chamber was an important arm of the English state. So-called because it convened in a room at Westminster with a star-spangled ceiling, it was partly feared as an instrument of censorship and government terror, and partly respected as a useful tool by which rich provincial thugs could be brought to justice. It was increasingly choked with business too. For this was a litigious age, and Star Chamber’s flexible approach to crime allowed it to hear many novel offences that were much harder to prosecute in the main common-law courts. It also dealt extensively with sedition, riot and particularly those cases where malefactors were using their own influence in the localities to evade justice.

More pain was to come. The ‘Cromwellian’ land settlement was planned by the Westminster Parliament from 1642, legislated by them in 1652 and would be kept in place long after Cromwell died. But without Oliver’s army, it couldn’t have happened. He and his soldiers won the military victories that made it possible. The 1652 act put into place the long-planned confiscation of 2.5 million acres, and – in theory – rendered some 80,000 Irish people liable to capital punishment (the relatively poor were exempted). A court was created to oversee the process, and hundreds of people were executed (though the court had virtually ceased activity by the time Cromwell actually came to power in 1653).

## Britain in Revolution Quotes
When the Long Parliament tried to outlaw the Prayer Book rites and services after the Civil War, it encountered a deep and widespread popular affection for them. Even the bitterly opposed altar rails cannot have been universally unpopular, for many parishes restored them spontaneously on the eve of the Restoration, before the Anglican order was formally reinstated.

The Great Migration to New England coincided almost exactly with the personal rule. Between 16z9 and 1640 about 6o,ooo men, women, and children made the journey, and far more than in the case of Virginia and the other older colonies whole families wound up their affairs in England and sailed to Massachusetts together.

During October Cromwell bombarded Winchester Castle into surrender on the 5th and then moved against Basing House, the strongly fortified mansion of the catholic Marquis of Winchester and a centre of heroic resistance. It had already withstood two sieges, the second lasting three months, but this one lasted only six days before Cromwell's siege guns blew two large breaches in its walls. The marquis, however, refused his summons to surrender, so he had to storm it. He did so with little loss, but the defenders fought almost to the last, and he let his men slaughter many of them, including six priests, before granting quarter to the majority. Since terms had been refused after essential defences had been breached they were not entitled to quarter, and a case could be made for punishing desperate resistance as an example, for the sake of saving soldiers' lives and shortening the war. Nevertheless it can hardly be doubted that Cromwell's uncharacteristic harshness sprang partly from Basing's notoriety as `a nest of idolatrous papists'.

The act did not tackle the really difficult problems of how much land should be confiscated and where, or how it should be distributed between the adventurers and the army in Ireland, but it did decree how the Irish people were to be dealt with. It granted pardon to all 'the inferior sort' who submitted, but with regard to men of substance it defined five categories who were to be excluded from pardon as to life or estate or both, according to their 'respective demerits'. A list of 105, headed by Ormond, were totally excepted by name; the other four excluded groups were all abettors of the rebellion in its early stages, all priests and Jesuits in any way involved in it, all who had murdered civilians, and all who failed to lay down their arms within twenty-eight days. Officers who had fought against the parliament were to be banished and their estates forfeited, though their wives and children were to be given land worth a third of what they had lost in a location to be decided by parliament. Non-belligerent catholics also faced forfeiture unless they had shown `constant good affection' to the parliament, though they were to be compensated elsewhere with land valued at two-thirds of what they surrendered.

The greatest economic injustice, and the heaviest blow to recovery, had been perpetrated by the Long Parliament long before Cromwell became Protector, when it decided not only to exclude Roman Catholics from municipal government and trading guilds but to expel them from all walled towns. Many of the less wealthy just moved out into the suburbs, and some simply evaded the ban, but most of the substantial catholic merchants left the country and settled abroad; St Mato was their favourite refuge. They took with them their ships, their stocks, and their expertise, causing a serious shortage of Irish-based shipping to carry Irish trade, and much urban decay, especially in Cork, Galway, Limerick, and Waterford.

Irishmen who took it were further required to bring up their children to speak only English and conform to the English catechism. Henry deplored this oath of abjuration, which naturally caused great consternation among Irish catholics, but having failed to prevent its extension to Ireland he seems to have made no attempt to impose it. Nor was there any drive to compel catholics to attend the services and receive the sacraments of a church that their consciences rejected, as there had been in Elizabethan and early Stuart England. Priests were officially proscribed; from January 1653 the policy was to banish them on pain of the penalties for high treason if they returned, and perhaps a thousand or more went into exile. But a considerable number returned and led an underground existence among the catholic population, despite a price of £5 on their heads. Those that were caught were commonly transported to the West Indies, but they were not in Henry's time subjected to a traitor's death. The number of Irish martyrs subsequently recommended to Rome for beatification comes to 119, including 22 laymen, for the years 1649-53, and of these 84 suffered in 1651-2; but the toll fell to 2 in 1654 and 3 in 1655, the year of Henry's arrival. There were none thereafter. Tragic though it was that the great majority of the Irish people could not practise their religion openly, Henry was moving in the direction of de facto toleration of discreet catholic worship, and the penal laws throughout the Cromwellian Protectorate were less harsh than they were to be under William III and after.

IN England, during the dozen years prior to the Protectorate, each major political turning-point had alienated a significant section of the Long Parliament's original adherents, and so had narrowed the basis of support for the government of the day. Woolrych, Austin. Britain in Revolution: 1625-1660 (Function). Kindle Edition.  When Civil War loomed, the constitutional royalists who had helped to pass the reforms of 1642 broke with Pym and his party and rallied to the king. In the crisis of 1648-9, most of the political presbyterians were driven into the wilderness by Pride's Purge and the regicide, and some of them became royalists. In 1653, Cromwell's expulsion of the Rump made enemies for life of such parliamentary republicans as Haselrig, Vane, Bradshaw, and Marten, while the Fifth Monarchists among others were never to forgive his elevation to the Protectorship at the end of the year.
