---
title: You should care about the English Civil Wars
date: 2025.06.11
---

# You should care about the English Civil Wars

From Fedralist Paper No. 85:

> These judicious reflections contain a lesson of moderation to all the sincere lovers of the union, and ought to put them upon their guard against hazarding anarchy, civil war, a perpetual alienation of the states from each other, and perhaps the military despotism of a victorious demagogue, in the pursuit of what they are not likely to obtain, but from TIME and EXPERIENCE.

It is easy to forget how near the spectre of civil war was to the founding. Conflict between the King Charles I and parliament over both the extent of his powers and the established protestant Church's doctrine in England and Scottland started three English Civil Wars and serveral knock-on conflicts between 1642 and 1652. In English conflicts alone, around 162,000 soldiers died between battle disease at a time when the country had only 5.5 million people - a preportionate death toll exceeding England's losses in the second World War. The second English Civil War culminated in parliament trying and convicting the King of high treason before executing him in front of the palace of Whitehall on Janurary 30th, 1649, leaving England without a king for the first time since before the Norman Conquest.

The English parliament had fought and won a revolutionary war for the right to govern themselves, tossing the English poltical and social hiearchy into disarray. Parliament lauched from one unstable constitution to another before the start of the protecerate government in 1653. The Brittish Isles were ruled as a republic with three branches of government with checks and balances, lead by Parlimentary Cavalry commander and the now Lord Protector Oliver Cromwell. Political stability finally returned after a decade of chaos, but Cromwell's death on September 3rd, 1658 spelled the end to Brittish self rule. Oliver Cromwell's son and successor wasn't nearly as capable at keeping conflicts between Parliament and the army at bay, leading to King Charles II's restoration on May 8th, 1660.

America's founding fathers built an enduring republic, succecceding where their forefathers had failed a century earlier. The conflict is embarassingly underemphasized in American civic education: two decades of chaos that killed hundreds of thousands of people and devestated the lives of many more taught the liberal tradition invavluble lessions in how not to organize society. The first of these lessions is on rule of law.

# Rule of Law

Even before the boths sides started trying to kill one other, King Charles I and his parliaments never got along. At this point in time parliaments were only elected and called to session at the order of the King. This was almost always in order to grant the King money, money that was almost always used to fight wars. In this day both franchise and membership in the House of Commons was restricted to only the wealthiest property owning men, and the House of Lords was an unelected body just as it remains today. Settled law was that taxes could not be raised without the consent of parliament, as the king needed buy-in from wealthy subjects. When the King called his first parliament [^useless-parliament] in 1625 the House of Commons broke with over a century of tradition and didn't grant the King the authority to collect import tariffs for life. Undettred, the King simply collected the duties anyway until 1641. Unable to make much progress with parliament, the king decided to demand extraparliemntary forced loans to fund the crown:

> ...in 1626 commissioners were appointed to levy the equivalent of five subsidies from everyone who was rated in the subsidy books. To the public at large it was indistinguishable from a large parliamentary grant, except that parliament had not granted it. Financially the Forced Loan was a success because very nearly five subsidies were collected, but seventy-six gentlemen went to prison rather than pay it. (At least fifteen peers also refused to pay, but significantly only one was imprisoned; peers were privileged, even in disobedience.) **Five of the imprisoned refugees launched a cause celebre by taking out writs of habeas corpus, which required the crown to state the reason for their imprisonment; they hoped thereby to bring the legality of the Loan under the judgment of the common law. The judges had collectively declined the king's request to pronounce it legal in advance, and he had sacked the senior Lord Chief Justice in consequence.**

As the plight of the five Knights became something of a _Cause célèbre_, Parliament conditioned any funding to the crown on the 1628 Petition of Right. This document forbade taxation without the consent of parliement, imprisionment without due process, or quartering soldiers in civilian homes without consent. The paralells with Article I, the fifth amendment.[^constitutional-paralells] The King's ascent of the Petition of Right did not prevent further disagrements with Parliament and decieded that the juice was no longer worth the squeeze. From 1629 to 1640 the King did his best to stay out of military engagements that would require funding from parlieament and funding with strings attached. The King and his councilors used every trick in the book to raise money without parliament:

- Monopolies: the king sold patents for companies to have a monopoloy on a given good, relying on a loophole in the 1624 Statute of Monopolies
- Ship money: in wartime the King could raise money to build the navy from coastal counties, but King Charles I raised it from _every_ county during peacetime
- Wardship: if a gentry landlord was a 'tenant-in-chief' landlord and died without an heir, the King was entitled to the rents of the estate and had to be _bought out_ before a succesor could take ownership
- Royal forests: fining people living in the suburbs of London and anywhere else that was technically royal forest at some point in the misty past

It's little wonder that when the King called a parliament in 1640 it would be less than two years before both sides would meet on the battlefield.

But not to be outdone, parliament and later republican governments were more than capable of trampling on the rule of law. In 1638 when war broke out with Scottland, the trusted royal advisor Earl of Strafford helped lead the military response and was convinced that hardliners in Parliament were collaborating with the Scottish rebels. In reponse, the commons accused and tried him for high treason. Extra seating was built in Westminster for the whole public to see how trecherous Strafford was, but representing himself in the impeachment proceedings he mounted an incredibly strong defense. Parliament's star wittness claimed that Strafford was trying to use Irish soldiers to supress English subjects, but every other piece of testimony showed that Strafford was arguing for Irish soldiers to be used for the war in Scottland. Undettered, parliament passed a Bill of Attainder; an act of parliament that could _declare someone guilty of a crime without a trial or jury_. Misteps by the king later that year meant that he longer had the political capital to save his friend and ever expect anything from another parliament, so royal assent of the bill meant that Strafford was publicly executed on May 12th, 1641 in front of a crowd of 100,000 people.

After the second English Civil War, the hardliners Oliver Cromwell and Henry Irenton used similarly shameful tactics to gain power. Infighting in parliament after victory in the first war gave the king an opening to start the second. When he again lost, many moderates in parliament wanted to put him back on the throne under the Treaty of Newport. While parliament in this day was hardly a representative body, it was reasonably representative of the public's view of the king: roughly half of England and Wales supported him over parliament with strong majorities in many parts of the kingdom. Rather than trying to convince their fellow MPs to draw a tougher line with the king, the army marched onto London with Cromwell and Irenton's backing. Allegedly without their knowledge, Colonel Thomas Pride had a list of royalist and moderate MPs to physically bar from parliament: these rightfully elected MPs were prevented from taking their place in parliament for eleven years. This much more pliant chamber made it possible to execute the King and engage in all manner of radical experiments in republican goverment.

Discussion of abuses of power from the revolutionaries cannot leave out the expropriation of land from the Irish. After Cromwell's conquest of Ireland, parliament started the process fo confiscating 2.5 million acres of land from Irish Catholic landlords to give to English soldiers. The act of Parliament that enabled this technically called for the 80,000 Irish people to be executed to make way for the English, but luckily less than 1000 people were executed as part of the disapropriation. The dispossesd Irish from every corner of the island were banished to small plots of land in the relatively barren county of Connaught. The best historial accounting implies that catholics went from owning 59% of Irish land in 1641 to just 22% by 1688.

Howerver, across all three kingdoms the conflict was about more than constitutional concerns. While the protestant reformation was in the rear view mirror, it's concequences were still playing out on the Brittish Isles.

# Religious Disputes

In England, Wales, and Scottland a strong majority of the population was protestant, and throughout the conflict Catholics were subject to recusancy fines and other forms of persecution. While King Charles I was a devout protestant, his marraige to the Catholic Queen Henrietta Maria from France fomented more than a few conspiracies that he was on the cusp of reimposing Catholicsism on the state protestant church. In England, what would become Anglican doctrine was hotly debated between both members of the clergy and the lay public. The purtains of the era argued that the existing episcopal hierarchy of bishops, emphasis sacrements in worship, and ornate churches reeked of residual catholicism that had to be purged. This was a broad social movement where Calvinism was the dominant theology, and their opponents included anti-Calvinists of different stripes, bishops who wanted to preseve their standing, and others who simply wanted to preseve the tradition and sacrements that had been a part of their worship for as long as they could remember.

While the king's unconstitutional taxation was facing opposition throughout England, his heavy-handed approach to the state church ruffled at least as many feathers. As supreme governour of the church, the King appointed many ceramonialist bishops. Few members of the clergy were as staunch supporters of the King as William Laud, whose loyalty was rewarded by his appoitnement to the archishop of Canterburry, the highest office in the Church of England. Laud was staunchly anti-puritain and wasn't shy about using the power of the state to harass his theological enemies. Extrajudicial punishment out of the Star Chamber [^star-chamber] were the order of the day, most notably against three men in 1637 who criticized the episcopal hierarchy in print. As punishment their ears were cut off, they were locked in a pillory, fined £5,000. The shocked crowds treated them as martyrs, draping them in garlands as they made their way to their prisons.

Puritains were not inclined to turn the other cheek when they had the power to do so. An 1643 act of parliament commanded the destruction of altars, icons, and statues given that prevailing puratain doctrine saw them as idolatrous. William Dowsing of Suffolk took this order with enthusaiasm, detailing his campaing of destruciton across 150 churches. But when the revolutionaries took special pleasure in destroying the catholic chappel of the queen after the royal family decamped to Oxford at the outset of the war. From _A People's History_:

> Clotworthy and his men proceeded to the side chapels, where they broke up two paintings of the Virgin and of St Francis, perhaps the iconoclasts’ least favourite saint. In the vestry, they flung a large statue of the Virgin and Child to the floor, and then smashed the Virgin’s face and the face of her child with feet and then with clubs. The sound of splintering stone spurred them on. In the chapel garden, they found another statue of St Francis, which they also destroyed, and another crucifix, ripe for breaking. The crackling fires that the soldiers lit burned long into the night, consuming shreds of canvas, books, rich embroidered vestments. **On Good Friday, the soldiers destroyed some minor masterpieces – Matthew Goodrich’s and Thomas de Critz’s oval ceiling painting of the Assumption of the Virgin**, a work even larger than Rubens’s Crucifixion. The remnants not burnt were again flung into the Thames.

Once armed conflict was coming to a close in England in the 1650s, parliament started stumbling in the direction of religious liberty. While the state church was purged of many royalists, there wasn't much in the way enforced puritan doctrine onto the Church of England. Before the victorian era, English christmas celebrations involed raccous debauchery and pre-reformation traditions that was seen by the puritains of the day as a noxious combination of paganism and catholicism. Christmas decoration and celebration was banned in republican England, but enforcement was spotty on account of the riots that would often errupt when local authourities tried to clamp down on the practice; the holiday still had broad appeal with the masses. But while the late king was concerned that relgious uniformity was neeccesary to keep his kingdom intact, republican England as the Church morality courts were abolished and mandatory church attendance was repealed. From _Britain in Revolution_:

> "All who professed faith in God by Jesus Christ were to be free to practise their religion, so long as they did not abuse it to the civil injury of others, or disturb the peace, or invoke it to justify licentiousness. This liberty was not to extend to 'popery or prelacy', but there was a widespread de facto toleration of Anglican \[pre-war ceramonial\] worship throughout the 1650s"

Perhaps most suprisingly, Oliver Cromwell offered assurances that recusancy laws punishing non-protestants wouldn't be enforced on London's Jewish community, which had been underground to the extent it existed at all since the explusion of all Brittish Jews in 1290. This started a small Jewish migration to London in the 1650s, paving the road to outright legalisation in 1664 after the restoration.

This is all not what many radical puritains wanted in revolutionary Britain. But most of Britain wasn't keen on either Archbishop Laud or doctrinaire Calvinists to use the levers of state power to oppress dissenting views. 'Live and let live', at least for some sects, was chosen out of exhaustion more than anything else.

In the last plank of this story, let's ask why so many of these changes weren't durrable. This is perhaps best told by tracing the arc of a yet undiscussed yet rather important character in the conflict.

# Stability in Political Revolutions

While Cromwell may be better known to history, he was second in command behind Sir Thomas Fairfax. Early on in the conflict parliament's armies struggled in the field, leading them to completely upend their command structure to form a more national force under a professional officer corp where members of parliament were bared from serving. Fairfax, who cared more for real battles than poltical ones, was chosen as it's first commander. This army, the New Model Army, was more meritocratic and displined in the field than both the royal force and the parliamentary armies that proceeded it, owing much of this to Fairfax and Cromwell.

Yet fifteen years after Fairfax took up the command against Charles I, he was one of twelve men sent across the English channel to formally invite the late king's son to the throne. What happened to change his mind?

- 1648: Army purge of moderate and royalist MPs
- 1649: King Charles I's trial, where none other than his wife shouted ‘Not half! Not a quarter of the people of England. Oliver Cromwell is a traitor!’
- Subsequent execution of the King at which point England and Scottland essentially didn't have a constitution and a 'Council of State' was running the government
- 1653: The sort-lived 'Nominated Assembly' government followed by the Instrument of Government constitution later that year where Fairfax's former second-in-command was appointed to Lord Protector and head of state for life
- 1657: The second Cromwellian constitution, the Humble Petition and Advice
- 1658: Oliver Cromwell's death

This is a tremendous amout of political change to take place in ten years. This is not what Fairfax had fought for, and by the early 1650s he was dissiliusioned from politics entirely.

Oliver Cromwell was a formidable statesmen, and as of 1657 it appeared that republican Briatin was on a stable footing: if you squint, the American republic followed a similar trajectory between Cornwallis's surrender and the ratification of the constitution. But the undoing of the republic was that no one else could balance the interests of parliament, the army, and the people. Before his death he named his eldest son Richard as his successor, but Richard's plans to shrink the size of the army lead to him being deposed less than a year later. The only other center of power in England consisted of a handful of MPs - either the radicals first elected in 1640 who were extreme enough to survive Pride's Purge, or those who won elections to fill the vacated seats. This body just as unpopular as the army it was vying for power with, and with Oliver Cromwell's death there was no one who could keep the two sides at bay. Parliament voted to dismss army leadership, and after a two-week standoff in October 1659 the army forcibly disolved parliament.

At this point the country went into open revolt. That December General George Monck raised an army in Scottland and marched south not to restore the current parliament but rather to establish order and call for free, general elections for the first time in 20 years. When he heard of Monck's plan, the gout-ridden one-time rebel Fairfax raised troops in York in support. Enough was enough: the time for republican political experimentation was over. The political capital and military power of Monck and his allies was no match for the half-hearted military junta in London. On May 1st, 1660, the newly elected parliament declared that 'the government is, and ought to be, by King, Lords, and Commons' - surprising absolutely no one. Fairfax and the rest of the parliamentary delegation visited the King's exile court in the Dutch city of Breda, and on the King's return London, a one time hotbed of revolution, cellebrated for three days straight.

Told this way, the conflict is an object lession in a couple of things:
1) Durable self-governing requires stability: otherwise too many people needed to make a republican government work correctly will take their ball and go home
2) Civilian control of the military by the executive branch is incredibly important
3) If your constitution is only stable when a once-in-a-generaiton political talent is in charge then it is destined to fail

# Much, much more

Since 1640, we can see how written constitutions protecting individual freedoms from minoritarian and majoritarian tyranny, tolerance across relgious sects, and stability after political revolutions have been table stakes for succesfull liberal democracies; the tyrnaies and dramatic revolutionary swings that the American constitution protects us from are not hypotheticals. While the American and French revolutions are more widely discussed, there are few better starting points for modern constitutionalism than this conflict than the English Civil Wars and the political revolution that followed.

In this era there were very few iredeemly bad or unimpeachably good characters. There were - and still are - real debates about what the wars were fought for, and many important figures switched sides as the events of those decades took on a life of their own. This makes for a fascinating part of history and it's little wonder that Tyler Cowen has written "you can’t read enough books about 17th century England". There are many fascinating aspects of the story that didn't make it into this post: the formation of the Quakers, communities who believed Acts 4:32 commanded proto-socialist collective ownership, or how the Marquis of Montrose entered Scottland with two men but strung together enough victories to breifly counquer the country.

If you've gotten this far, you owe it to yourself to listen to Mike Duncan's excellent [podcast series](https://podcasts.apple.com/us/podcast/1-1-the-kingdoms-of-charles-stuart/id703889772?i=1000167630201) on the wars of three kingdoms. When you're ready for more, read any of the books in the references below. You cannot tell the story of the modern world without it, and luckily for you it was a fractally fascinating point in time.

# References

Alexander Hamilton, James Madison, and John Jay. 1788. The Federalist Papers. J. and A. McLean, New York, NY.
Austin Woolrych. 2004. _Britain in Revolution: 1625-1660_. Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK.
Jonathan Healey. 2023. _The Blazing World: A New History of Revolutionary England, 1603-1689_. Bloomsbruy, London, UK.
Diane Purkiss. 2006. _The English Civil War: A People's History_. HarperCollins, London, UK.
Tyler Cowen. February 22, 2023. Marginal Revolution. "What I've been reading". Retrieved from https://marginalrevolution.com/marginalrevolution/2023/02/what-ive-been-reading-235.html.

[^useless-parliament]: In this era some sittings of parliament were given names, and this one's is the 'Useless Parliament'
[^constitutional-paralells]: The paralells with Article I, the fifth amendment, and the third amendment almost go without saying.
[^star-chamber]: While this is a figure of spech in modern times, this was a literal part of the English court in the 17th century
